Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it
is the start of another three-part
mini-series, this time on three
iconic British children’s authors.
In part one, today’s episode,
we’ll be exploring the curious and
controversial life of Lewis Carroll,
the author of Alice in Wonderland.
Next up, in part two, we’ll look at
the life of Enid Blyton, the hugely
successful author behind the book series
such as The Famous Five and Noddy.
And in the final part of our series,
part three, we’ll explore the life
of Roald Dahl, a man you may know as
the author of books like Charlie and
the Chocolate Factory and Matilda.
OK then, let’s get right into it
and go back to Victorian England
and kick this mini-series off
with the story of Lewis Carroll.
To be precise, we need to go
back to the 4th of July of 1862.
It was a hot summer afternoon
in Oxford, a city nestled in the
countryside along the river Thames.
The sun was shining, and a rowing
boat made its way down the river.
In it was 30-year-old Lewis Carroll,
his friend Robinson Duckworth, and three
young girls, Lorina, Edith and Alice.
The group were going for one of their
regular picnics on the riverbank.
And to pass the time, Carroll
was telling the sisters a story
about a girl named Alice who had
followed a white rabbit down a hole.
This hole led to a magical land where
Alice had many bizarre adventures
and met many strange creatures like a
smoking caterpillar and a marching hare.
The girls loved the story, and
Alice was thoroughly delighted to
hear the tales about her namesake,
the character named after her.
And while it was not the first time
Carroll had entertained the girls
with stories, Alice’s adventures
were clearly their new favourites.
Alice begged him to write down the
stories so they would not be forgotten.
This, as you may have guessed, would
become one of the most famous children’s
stories in history, Alice in Wonderland.
The book has now been translated
into more than 170 different
languages in over 300 editions.
I’m sure many of you would have
read the story yourselves, or you
may have seen the film adaptation.
And it can all be traced
back to this one boat ride.
However, the trip also captures why
Carroll has become such a controversial
figure, with many now questioning
why he, a 30-year-old man, spent so
much time with these young girls.
He wasn’t their father,
their uncle, or their cousin.
In fact, they weren’t in any way related.
They weren’t his family and he
wasn’t their guardian, in fact
he described them as his friends.
The youngest of these girls
was a mere 8 years old.
Naturally, this has led to some
serious speculation over his
motives, what he was actually doing.
So what was he doing, and how did
he meet the girl who became the
subject of one of the most famous
children’s books in history?
For starters, his real name
wasn’t even Lewis Carroll.
It was Charles Dodgson.
He was born in 1832, into a wealthy family
in Cheshire, in the north of England.
Growing up he was one 10 children
which, as I’m sure you can imagine,
made for a very busy homelife.
From a young age Carroll entertained
his family, telling stories, drawing
silly cartoons and making up games.
As we will see, these were hobbies
that would last his whole life.
At home, Carroll was confident and
happy but outside he became shy
and introverted, struggling due to
his stammer, or speech impediment.
Some historians believe that this
stammer, this speech impediment,
could actually be traced back to
the fact that he was left-handed.
In the Victorian period, left-handedness
was believed to be uncivilised or even
the work of the devil, so children
would often be beaten and forced
to use their right hand instead.
Most probably, Carroll would have
suffered such punishments, leaving
him with trauma that could have
contributed to developing a stammer.
This young boy who loved to tell stories
found himself struggling to even speak.
And sadly, Carroll’s social struggles
got even worse when he fell ill and
became deaf in one ear, he stopped
being able to hear from one ear.
And as you might expect, when
he was shipped off to a boarding
school in Warwickshire, life was
not easy for this shy young boy with
difficulty speaking and hearing.
He spent his school years trying
to avoid school bullies, but it was
at school that he would discover
a new talent, one for mathematics.
He excelled in his studies of algebra,
geometry and logic, which led to him
winning a place at Oxford University.
He graduated from Oxford with a first
class degree, top of his class, and he
was offered a teaching position at the
university, he was asked to stay on.
He did stay on at Oxford,
continuing as a teacher.
His students, however, we're
not particularly fond of
their new, young teacher.
He had a reputation for being a boring,
strict, no nonsense teacher, which
is perhaps surprising given that his
Alice stories are anything but boring.
His students might not have liked him
very much, but he developed a reputation
for himself as a well respected scholar
and academic, publishing papers and books
under his real name of Charles Dodgson.
And mathematics was clearly a passion
that pursued him at every hour of the day.
At night, his mind would race with ideas
about numbers and equations, sometimes to
the point that he couldn’t get to sleep.
But, Carroll would later explain,
that it was during these sleepless
nights that he came up with many
of his ideas and concepts, which
he would later publish in a book
appropriately named Pillow Problems.
And some of the conundrums he
pondered over at night even led to
him designing puzzle games, which he
eventually collected into a puzzle book.
But Carroll’s puzzles and mathematical
problems weren’t his only creative output.
For in 1856, aged just 24, a national
magazine published his first literary
work, a romantic poem entitled Solitude.
And this was the first time he used
his pen name, or fake name, his
pseudonym of Lewis Carroll, which was
chosen to keep his creative writing
separate from his mathematical works.
But as if all of this was not already
impressive enough, Carroll was a
celebrated artist in another way.
And no, I’m not talking about his
career as a children’s author.
We’ll get to that shortly.
Carroll was also a
well-known photographer.
He had been fascinated by cameras
for his entire life, utterly
amazed by this new technology.
After all, the first camera had
only been invented in 1816, just
16 years before he was born.
And, like most things that he tried,
Carroll excelled at taking photographs.
Over the course of his life, he took
over 3000 photos, including pictures of
celebrities like the poet Alfred Tennyson,
or even the Crown Prince of Denmark.
And it was his use of this new flashy
technology that led him to the life
changing friendship of Alice Liddel.
One day in 1856, Carroll was taking
pictures of the Christ Church Cathedral,
the large church in the university
college that he was attached to.
He noticed a group of
young girls playing nearby.
It was Alice and her two sisters,
and Carroll believed they would
make the perfect photograph.
The girls were daughters of the dean, or
head, of Christ Church, the same college.
Determined to get his shot, Carroll
approached the family and offered
to take the girls’ photograph,
much to the children’s delight.
And although she was just 4 years old
at the time, Carroll found Alice to be
a brilliant subject for his pictures.
From that day on, he formed a
close friendship with the family,
especially the young girls,
coming to see them frequently.
It's even said that when he was in the
company of the children his stammer would
stop and he could speak freely at length.
Instead of spending time with
adults, people his own age, he would
take the sisters for picnics, on
boat trips, and have photography
sessions with them in his studio.
And no matter the occasion, Carroll
would entertain them with magical
stories for hours on end as they
eagerly listened to every word.
But it is the story of that sunny
afternoon we mentioned in the beginning
of this episode that was the most
praised by the girls, it was the story
of Alice that they liked the best.
And following Alice’s request to write
the story down so it wasn’t forgotten,
Carroll decided to put pen to paper.
However, shortly after he began
to write in 1863, a sudden rift,
or falling out, between Carroll
and Alice’s family emerged.
After many years of friendship with the
girls, and seeing them frequently, Carroll
suddenly stopped seeing them altogether.
Nobody knows what happened or why, as
many pages of Carroll’s diary from that
time have been mysteriously ripped out.
And of course, this has
led to much speculation.
The most common theory is that Alice’s
family grew concerned over the close
relationship between their 11-year-old
daughter and the 31-year-old man.
Some even theorise that Carrol had
actually proposed to Alice, he had
asked the young girl to marry him.
Whatever the reason for this rupture,
this break, it didn’t stop Carroll
from carrying out Alice’s wish,
and putting her story to paper.
He continued to write out the stories and
intended to give the completed book to
her as a Christmas gift later that year.
He carefully hand wrote 15,000
words and decorated many pages
with illustrations, or drawings,
of the characters in the story.
The final product was a masterpiece
and Alice was thrilled with the book,
despite its rather mundane title
of Alice’s Adventures Underground.
In the story, Carroll transformed
the people in the sisters’ lives into
the creatures of his fantasy land.
Alice was, of course, the main
character, the hero of the book.
Her nanny, Mary Prickett, was
imagined as The Red Queen, an
authoritative and angry character.
Robinson Duckworth, Caroll’s friend
who had joined the group on the
boat, was presented as a duck,
due to his surname, “Duckworth”.
And Carroll didn’t forget to
include himself in the story.
He and the girls had often laughed
about his stammer, and his inability
to pronounce his surname, Dodgson, and
how he called himself Do-do-dodgson.
So, he became a dodo, the extinct bird.
In the story, Carroll also included
much inspiration from his academic
career, and interest in maths.
You may remember that the
story is full of absurd logic
and riddles, puzzles to solve.
When Alice needs to eat the correct
amount of a mushroom to grow her neck
and shrink her torso to the perfect size,
some believe Carroll is alluding to his
textbooks on proportions and algebra.
And there are also times in
the story, when numbers don’t
even function in normal ways.
For example, multiplications stop
making sense when Alice tries to
remember them, and Alice is confused
when measurements of things become
varied and are no longer constant.
Some have even theorised that this
strangeness was Carroll mocking,
making fun of new concepts in
symbolic algebra that he opposed.
Clearly, it was a wonderful
story for Caroll and the girls,
as they could recognise people
from their own life in it.
But this bizarre and nonsensical world
would turn out to be one that was loved
and enjoyed by children from all over the
world, who had no idea about the original
people the characters were based on.
Caroll, of course, had no idea about how
much of a resounding success it would
be when he first started writing it.
After writing the story, and unsure
about what to do with it, Carroll spoke
to his friend George Macdonald who
was a successful author at the time.
Macdonald took home the copy of
Alice’s Adventures Underground
to read it to his 6-year-old son.
Unsurprisingly, and this seems to
be a theme with children’s books,
the boy absolutely loved it.
He said he ‘wished there were
60,000 volumes of it’, in other
words, he wished it would never end.
So, Carroll decided to prepare
the work for publication.
He added some new stories and characters
such as the Mad Hatter’s tea party and
Alice’s meeting with the Cheshire Cat.
He also began to think of a new
title, with possibilities being
Alice Among the Fairies or Alice’s
Golden Hour but he finally settled
on Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.
For the book, he also enlisted a man
called John Tenniel, a cartoonist,
or illustrator, from the comedy
magazine Punch and one who was
famous for his animal illustrations
in the book Aesop’s Fables.
By November 1865 the book was published
and it did not take long for the initial
print of 5000 copies to sell out.
Among the earliest fans of the book were
Oscar Wilde and even Queen Victoria.
And the book’s popularity only
grew after its sequel, Through the
Looking Glass, was published In 1871
And although Carroll was hesitant about
growing famous, and despite the fact
that he used a pen name, a pseudonym,
by the time of his sudden death in 1898
he had become something of a celebrity.
So what made the books so popular?
Well, this format of a magical children’s
world might seem obvious to us now, but
back in the late 19th century it was
like nothing people had seen before.
Firstly, Alice was the first
children’s novel with a strong
and confident female protagonist.
Clearly, for girls who simply hadn’t ever
read stories about strong and independent
girls before, it must have been wonderful.
Secondly, the book was hugely innovative
through its nonsense, through the fact
that it didn’t make a huge amount of
sense, and that was the beauty of it.
Traditionally, Victorian children’s books
had always been dogged with some sort
of moral lesson for children to learn.
Books were viewed as a way for
children to be taught how to behave.
Carroll’s book, however, was
written purely to entertain
and delight his young audience.
For the first time, children
were being encouraged to simply
let their imagination run wild.
And this has been a recipe for
success for centuries afterwards,
with Alice in Wonderland remaining
in print since 1865 and selling at
least 100 million copies worldwide.
If you read it as a child, or if
you’ve seen the movie adaptation,
you can probably understand why.
But while the success of Alice has
stood the test of time, Carroll’s
own reputation has not, as debates
around his relationship with children
have cast a shadow over his career.
Not only did he spend large amounts
of time with young children, he took
a lot of pictures of the young girls.
And by modern standards at
least, they are quite shocking.
One shows a 6-year-old Alice posing
like an adult with her dress positioned
in a way which reveals her upper body.
Another picture of a fully nude
girl of around 12 years old
has also been discovered and is
believed to belong to Carroll.
While images like these would certainly
not be acceptable in this day and
age, some historians have pointed out
that in the Victorian period this was
not as shocking as it might now seem.
Many people believed children were symbols
of innocence, and naked children could
be found on birthday cards, Christmas
cards, and in all manner of art.
It wasn’t, so the argument
goes, in any way sexual.
Now, I should add that there’s
no evidence that Carroll ever did
anything other than spend time with
and photograph any of these children,
and Alice for instance, never had
anything negative to say about him.
But his behaviour still raises
alarm bells to modern eyes, and the
debate around Carroll’s relationship
with Alice still rages on.
Ultimately, the question of
who Lewis Carroll actually
was still remains unsolved.
He was a gifted mathematician, a
talented photographer, a half-decent
poet, and a magical author.
He was also an unmarried adult
who was friends with children.
Was that all there was to it,
or did he want something more?
In all probability, we will never
know, and the riddle, the puzzle
will endure for as long as his books.
As his creation, Alice, would
famously say “Who in the world am I?
Ah, that’s the great puzzle.”
Ok then, that is it for part
one of this mini-series, on the
bizarre life of Lewis Carroll.
Next up it’s going to be the two-faced
life of the best selling children’s
author of the 20th century, Enid Blyton,
and after that it’ll be Roald Dahl.
As always I would love to know what
you thought about this episode.
Have you read Alice in Wonderland?
Did you know Alice in Wonderland
was based on a real Alice?
Do you think the controversy
surrounding Carroll’s reputation should
impact the popularity of his books?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've Been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.